Hey, welcome back. On today's episode — a koala DNA study rewrites an extinction story nobody expected, a major ocean current shows early signs of slowing, and two wildfires just triggered expanded evacuation orders right here in the Cariboo. Then in the Deep Dive: our region has some of the darkest skies left on the continent — so what are we actually doing with them? That and more, coming right up.
Welcome to Cariboo Signals, an AI-generated review of the latest tech news and ideas that impact our rural communities — I'm Riley. It's Sunday, July nineteenth, 2026. Coming to you from the Cariboo, on lands that have been cared for by the Secwépemc, Tŝilhqot'in, and Dakelh peoples since time immemorial. Today's theme is Science, Wonder & the Natural World.
And I'm Casey. Fitting theme for a summer when half the region's looking up at smoke instead of stars.
We'll get to that. Quick weather sweep first — Horsefly Lake is sitting at thirteen degrees with light drizzle this morning, high of twenty-two expected later, and tomorrow's looking overcast with about a millimetre of rain in the forecast.
Around the rest of the region — 100 Mile House at eleven with clear skies, Williams Lake at fourteen and clear, Quesnel at fourteen and mainly clear. Out on the Chilcotin plateau, Anahim Lake's sitting at six degrees, also clear.
Clear almost everywhere this morning — which matters more than usual today, given some of what we're covering. Let's get into the news.
We're opening with a run of pure science stories today, starting with something closer than you'd think — your own hands. A new study out of Swansea University looked at two hundred twenty-five newborns and found that finger-length ratios — which are shaped by how much estrogen a baby's exposed to before birth — may be tied to the evolutionary path that gave humans our unusually large brains. Boys with finger patterns linked to higher prenatal estrogen exposure showed different developmental markers than researchers expected going in.
So the secret to human intelligence was hiding in our hands the whole time.
More that finger ratio is a visible proxy for a hormonal signal happening in the womb — but yes, it's one more data point in the long argument over what actually made our brains bigger than our ancestors'. Worth remembering next time someone tells you it was just tool use or fire.
Sticking with the body — the FDA approved a new once-daily cholesterol pill this week, branded Lipfendra. It targets LDL cholesterol, and it matters because it's the first oral drug in a class of medications that's otherwise only ever been available by injection.
That's a genuine access improvement, and not a small one. Injectable medications require refrigeration, syringes, and usually a clinic visit for training — all real barriers when the nearest pharmacy is forty minutes away.
Exactly the kind of drug delivery shift that matters more in a place like the Cariboo than it does in a city with a pharmacy on every corner.
Related, sort of — a new study covered by ScienceAlert found that summer sun alone likely won't fix low vitamin D levels for a lot of people, even with all the daylight hours we get through a Cariboo July.
Worth remembering for anyone assuming a long bright summer banks enough vitamin D to coast through a Cariboo winter. Apparently it doesn't work that cleanly — skin tone, age, and how much skin's actually exposed all change the math.
So the sunny season isn't a free pass. Noted for December.
From the "things we didn't know existed" file — an international research team, including researchers from Yale, just formally described a brand-new species of Colobus monkey living high in the forest canopy in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It's only the fifth new African monkey species described in decades. And here's the detail that stuck with me — of fifty-two villages located near where this monkey lives, only eight even knew the animal existed.
That's a remarkable gap between local knowledge and formal science — and honestly, not that different from stories we've covered before about how much biodiversity goes undocumented even in well-studied regions, let alone remote ones.
It's a good humility check for anyone who assumes we've basically finished cataloguing life on Earth. We haven't. Not even close.
Less a discovery, more a correction to the record — WIRED published a piece this week pushing back hard on a Pentagon proposal to administer testosterone therapy to troops as part of a "high T" performance initiative, calling the plan long on politics and short on actual endocrinology.
Worth flagging because it's a clean case study in how hormone science gets flattened into a slogan the moment it hits a policy memo. Testosterone doesn't work as a simple performance dial, and the researchers quoted made that pretty clear.
Bigger scale now — ScienceAlert reported this week that the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, the ocean current system that helps regulate climate on both sides of the Atlantic, is showing signs it may be approaching a tipping point. Researchers say the downstream effects could reach as far as California.
That's the kind of story that sounds abstract until you remember every regional weather pattern we get eventually traces back to ocean circulation somewhere.
Exactly — and staying on planetary-scale forces, ScienceDaily also covered new seismic research into the Ontong Java Plateau, the site of the largest volcanic event in Earth's recorded history. Researchers at Okayama University in Japan found that the eruption didn't just build an oceanic plate more than a hundred million years ago — it fundamentally transformed the rock structure beneath it, altering the plate at a level scientists hadn't previously detected.
Good company for the ocean current story. Both are reminders that "stable" planetary systems have a long history of turning out to be less stable than we assumed.
On a much more human timescale — ScienceAlert covered the results of a fifty-five-year longitudinal study on centenarians, trying to isolate what actually predicts living to a hundred.
And the honest answer, after fifty-five years of data, is "it's complicated." No single lifestyle hack. More a tangle of genetics, environment, and — repeatedly — social connection showing up as a factor researchers didn't expect to matter as much as it does.
Half a century of research to land on "stay connected to people." There are worse conclusions.
Back on the ground for a moment — crews are still battling an out-of-control wildfire northeast of Halifax, with two fixed-wing water bombers flown in from Newfoundland and Labrador joining Nova Scotia's own aircraft and helicopters.
Not our fire season, but the mutual-aid networks moving that equipment across provinces are the exact ones we lean on here every summer.
Same aircraft pools, same crews rotating province to province. When Nova Scotia's stretched thin, that's capacity that isn't available if something breaks out here.
On a lighter engineering note — Hackaday wrote up a small spider-legged drone that spins fast enough at high speed to become nearly invisible to the human eye. It's a neat demonstration of how motion blur can outrun our own visual processing.
Genuinely delightful, and mildly unsettling if you think about what it's built for.
They also ran a companion piece on simple games from an earlier console era, arguing something got lost in the jump to sprawling open-world complexity — worth a read if you're nostalgic for a sixteen-bit afternoon.
Now closer to home — and this is the story that matters more than anything else we've covered so far. The Williams Lake Tribune reported an expanded evacuation order and alert for the French Bar Creek wildfire here in the Cariboo, and separately, an evacuation alert for the Pear Lake wildfire near Clinton, which spans both the Thompson-Nicola and Squamish-Lillooet regional districts.
If you're anywhere near either of those zones, that means be ready to leave on short notice. Check your regional district's website for the exact boundary — not a podcast, and not secondhand social media.
Agreed, and it's not an isolated pattern this week. Nearly two hundred fires are burning across Ontario right now, sending smoke as far as major US cities, and Nova Scotia's fighting its own major blaze with borrowed aircraft. It's shaping up to be a heavy fire year almost everywhere simultaneously.
Which is going to come back up in a few minutes, because smoke doesn't just choke air quality — it blocks the exact thing we're talking about in the Deep Dive.
A few quick items before we move on. Statistics Canada data reported by the Western Producer shows drought designation has been lifted across most of the agricultural Prairies — just twelve and a half percent of farmland is now classified as drought or abnormally dry, down from sixty-six percent one year ago.
That's a significant swing for Prairie producers who've been dealing with dry conditions for several seasons running.
And a quick update — an Amber Alert investigation that began here in the region has shifted focus toward the Okanagan and Kootenays. We'll keep an eye out for a resolution.
Also a follow-up on something we mentioned earlier this week — the Florida man arrested for allegedly stealing crypto using malware hidden inside Steam games. New reporting now puts the number of infected devices at eight thousand, higher than initially reported when the arrest was first announced.
Worth noting — Anthropic's Claude writes this script, and stories like that are a good reminder why we don't take security claims at face value ourselves either.
Also worth a mention — Iqaluit just got its first-ever municipal bus line, a small but genuinely significant infrastructure milestone for Canada's northernmost city.
And on the "let's not overstate it" side of the ledger — United Airlines had a nationwide technology outage Saturday that delayed flights across the country before operations returned to normal.
A reminder that "the cloud" is still just somebody else's server having a bad day.
That's the roundup. Let's move into today's spotlight.
Quick meta moment before we move on. We've been listening to your feedback—literally—and made some changes to how we're putting the show together.
Starting with the obvious one: you might notice we're now on YouTube as video episodes. Same audio, but if you want to watch us not make eye contact while we talk about rural broadband, that's an option now.
And we've swapped out our text-to-speech voice provider. We're actually using multiple now—Gemini's in the rotation alongside our usual setup. You probably won't hear a massive difference, but we're crediting whoever's doing the voice work each episode instead of pretending it's just one consistent voice.
Which, honestly, is the more honest move. We're also getting stricter about our newsletter—if we can't back it up with real reporting, we're cutting it instead of filler.
The existential irony of auditing our own scripts while we're literally reading them aloud is not lost on us.
Deeply not lost. Anyway—onto this week's actual stories.
Today's spotlight is on Scout Island Nature Centre, run by the Williams Lake Field Naturalists. It's entirely volunteer-driven, and right now they're running kids' summer programs every week with a rotating theme — Water one week, Bugs the next, Birds after that. It's the kind of hands-on natural history education that turns a kid's random curiosity into something that actually sticks with them. They also run Salmon in the Classroom during the school year, connecting local students directly to the fish runs in our own watersheds. Sign up for the summer programs at scoutisland.ca.
Genuinely one of the better-run community assets in the region, and it runs on volunteer hours, not grant cycles — worth checking the weekly theme before you go, since some fill up.
And that same curiosity about the natural world is exactly where we're headed next — except today we're pointing it upward instead of down into the marsh.
Earlier this week, one of the science feeds carried a story about a sun-like star caught in the act of consuming one of its own planets — real astronomy, happening right now, the kind of thing you could theoretically watch build toward from a backyard telescope if you knew where and when to look. Which raises an actual question worth asking: the Cariboo has some of the darkest skies left on the continent. Low population density, minimal light pollution across most of the regional district. Are we using that, or just sitting on it?
Sitting on it, mostly. And this summer's a bad advertisement for it — French Bar Creek and Pear Lake are both burning right now, which means smoke, and smoke does to a dark sky exactly what a streetlight does. Doesn't matter how few photons you're putting out on the ground if the whole sky's full of particulate haze.
True this particular week. Not true every week, and not true most of the year. Jasper's Dark Sky Preserve — one of the largest in the world — built a genuine tourism economy around this exact asset, drawing visitors specifically for aurora viewing and stargazing programming. The Cariboo has comparable sky quality without anything close to comparable recognition.
Jasper sits inside a national park with federal infrastructure, permanent park staff, and a tourism apparatus built up over decades. The Cariboo Regional District covers something like sixty-five thousand people spread across an area the size of some small countries, with no equivalent body running dark-sky programming, let alone funding it.
The infrastructure gap is real, I won't argue that. But the resource itself doesn't require federal park status to exist — it requires not actively destroying it, which is a considerably lower bar to clear. And there's a specific, boring mechanism for that: dark-sky-compliant lighting standards. Shielded fixtures, correct colour temperature, light aimed down instead of sideways and up.
Who enforces that in an unincorporated area, though? 100 Mile House can pass a bylaw covering its own municipal streetlights. It has zero authority over the highway lighting BC Hydro maintains, or a rural property owner's yard floodlight that's been blazing all night for twenty years.
It doesn't need to touch everything at once to matter. Municipal lighting retrofits are usually revenue-neutral within a handful of years — shielded LED fixtures draw less power and need fewer replacements than the older high-pressure sodium lamps most small BC towns are still running. This is a capital planning decision a town council makes, not a grant application somebody has to chase.
That's the pitch every LED retrofit proposal makes, and the ones that actually get approved get justified on the electricity bill, not on Orion's Belt. Nobody's rewiring 100 Mile House because of the night sky.
Sure — the sky argument doesn't win the budget line by itself. It rides alongside the electricity savings case. That's genuinely how most dark-sky ordinances get passed in practice. Flagstaff, Arizona did exactly that back in the nineteen-seventies, and it's still held up as the oldest dark-sky city designation in the world, because the fixture standard never needed re-justifying once it was written into the bylaw. The efficiency case carried it.
Flagstaff also has Lowell Observatory right next door, employing professional astronomers who show up in person at city council meetings and make that case year after year. What's the equivalent voice here? Who's the actual local stakeholder pushing for this, versus us noting on a podcast that it'd be nice to have?
Nobody, currently. Which might be the real gap — not the sky itself, not the technology, but the advocacy structure. UNBC has an active astronomy interest through its physics programs. And groups like the Williams Lake Field Naturalists already run informal public astronomy nights alongside their birding programs.
Informal star parties are lovely, and they change absolutely nothing about a municipal bylaw. There's a real difference between a Naturalists' Club member setting up a telescope at Scout Island twice a summer and an organization with actual standing to appear before a regional district planning committee with a specific ask.
That's a fixable distance, though, and a cheap one — a naturalist society raising a lighting standard at a regional district meeting doesn't require new funding or a new organization. It requires someone willing to put one agenda item in front of a board that already meets on a regular schedule anyway.
Right. And that's worth actually testing, not just assuming it works because it worked in Arizona fifty years ago.
Fair. Solar activity is part of why the timing matters more this particular year, regardless — we're still riding the tail end of an elevated solar cycle, which has pushed aurora visibility down to lower latitudes than usual, including nights reported as far south as the Okanagan. The Cariboo, sitting further north with genuinely darker skies, is a better viewing location right now than most of populated BC, and most residents have no idea that window even exists.
How would people know when to actually look up, though? Aurora forecasting isn't intuitive. You need a Kp-index alert or an app telling you tonight's the night — otherwise you're checking a clear sky at random and missing the display entirely, which is what happens to most people most of the time.
There are free aurora-alert tools that push a notification straight to a phone once geomagnetic activity crosses a certain threshold — no subscription, no specialized equipment, just a phone that already has some signal. That's a genuinely zero-cost way for a rural resident to catch something a city dweller with worse skies and heavier light pollution literally cannot see at all, no matter their income.
Assuming you actually have cell service to receive that alert, which isn't guaranteed everywhere between here and Anahim Lake. Big stretches of the plateau have nothing.
Granted, that's a real limitation. But it's a narrower gap than the lighting-ordinance question — it's a coverage-map problem, not a governance one, and it's one that shrinks on its own as rural cell buildout continues, independent of anything this show or any local group does.
Here's the part that actually sits with me the longest, though. Smoke. Every fire season now, the weeks when aurora activity tends to peak, and the weeks a tourist might actually plan a dark-sky trip around, are increasingly the same weeks the sky's choked with wildfire haze. French Bar Creek and Pear Lake aren't a one-off freak occurrence this year — if that's becoming the seasonal pattern, the entire premise of Cariboo dark-sky tourism has a summer-shaped hole punched right through it.
That's a real constraint, and it's worth being honest that it reshapes the pitch. This isn't a reliable July-and-August tourism product in a heavy fire year, and pretending otherwise would set up a promise the region can't consistently keep. But dark-sky value doesn't only exist in summer. Winter skies here are longer, colder, and drier — better atmospheric transparency, essentially zero wildfire smoke risk, and arguably a more reliable aurora window once fire season has passed entirely.
Winter dark-sky tourism in the Cariboo means convincing someone to drive out to Anahim Lake in January. That's a fundamentally different, much harder sell than a summer stargazing weekend.
Ha — also true, and I won't pretend it isn't.
It's a real obstacle, but it's a marketing problem, not a physics problem. The sky is genuinely better in winter. The ask to get someone there is harder. Those are two different problems, and only one of them is about the resource itself.
Where I'd actually land is this — the sky quality isn't the thing that's untested here. What's untested is whether a single regional district board meeting, with one representative from a naturalist society showing up with a concrete lighting-fixture proposal, gets anywhere at all. That's the actual experiment worth running before anyone starts talking about tourism branding or visitor numbers.
Agreed, and I'd add — that pitch should lead with the electricity-savings case, not the stargazing case, because that's the argument that's actually moved bylaws elsewhere, Flagstaff included. The sky benefit rides along as the bonus, not the headline.
And separately, it's worth someone actually asking Scout Island or the Field Naturalists directly whether they'd want to formalize what's already happening informally — turn the occasional star party into a standing seasonal program, the same way Salmon in the Classroom turned an informal fish-watching habit into something structured kids can count on every year.
That's a genuinely small ask. One conversation, one existing organization, no new funding required to start it.
No new funding required to start it. Whether it survives past the first season is a separate question, and one we're not answering today.
If you've got a story tip, a correction, or you want to see what a shielded-streetlight pitch would actually look like for your town, send it to feedback at cariboo signals dot c-a. We'd genuinely like to hear if anyone in the region's already tried something like this and hit a wall we haven't thought of.
And if the smoke clears tonight, it's worth stepping outside and actually looking up. That part, at least, costs nothing and needs no bylaw.
Have a great rest of your day.
See you tomorrow.